Optimal at this altitude,
I can run flat out for a half mile before my hands start shaking.
I'm a cybernetic organism,
living tissue over metal.
This episode is brought to you by kettle and fire,
which makes some of the best bone broth and certainly the most convenient that
I've ever found.
And I have a big stack of them on my kitchen counter.
Right now.
I have one container every morning and this first came highly recommended to me
by past podcast guests such as Amelia Boone,
who is a four time world champion in world's toughest mudder,
Spartan race,
etc. And Dr Dominic D'agostino,
the incredible hulk of scientific research should check him out too.
But there are few things that make kettle and fire special.
Number one,
they are the first shelf stable.
In other words,
never frozen bone broth that uses bones from 100% grass fed,
organically raised animals,
so you are what you eat,
ate,
if that makes sense.
So it's very important that you understand if you're consuming animal protein,
what they consumed.
They also use longer cook times,
20 plus hours,
which means more collagen and other nutrients.
For instance,
they contain 19 times more Collagen,
then one of their close competitors and an independent lab confirm this.
I'll leave the competitor's name out of it because I don't want to get sued.
But that's the case and it is not frozen.
So thanks to many millions of dollars of packaging equipment.
They're bone broth doesn't require freezing or shipping with dry ice.
So like I said,
it's just sitting on my kitchen counter in these boxes and then I can heat them
up.
They're basically ready to drink,
heat them up on the stove top or in a microwave and your ready to rock and roll.
And you also get a nice payload of Glucosomine glycine,
uh,
along with the Joelton and everything else that I mentioned.
So check it out.
I've been hugely pleased with this and like I said,
had been consuming it every morning it gives you about,
I want to say 20 grams of protein,
which is a nice little slow carb diet boost if that's what you're looking for
it.
And then I'll typically sip this out of a very large camping coffee mug is I do
some writing or journaling.
So are have it,
check it out.
It's delicious.
I favor the chicken but uh,
each to his own or her own.
So check it out.
Kettle and fire.com forward slash Tim and you can receive 20% off of your entire
order.
Take a look,
Kevin,
fire.com forward slash.
Tim
this episode is brought to you by a cent protein,
the cleanest,
least process protein I've ever consumed and I have tried just about everything
since well before the four hour body.
I've started my day with 20 to 30 grams of protein.
First thing that has been part
of my routine,
but I don't always have the time or necessarily the desire to cook an entire
meal.
So what to do.
Protein powders can be a fast way to get this protein need met,
but most products are full of crap.
They're bleached,
they have excess sugar,
terrible artificial sweeteners or just straightforward low grade,
low quality protein.
Ascent contains zero artificial ingredients and the parent company is actually a
cheese manufacturer,
so they produce their own native proteins.
It's,
it's really fascinating.
And I've looked at they're processing it takes or it took them about five years
to develop.
You can mix the protein in as little as four ounces without any clumps or issues
of mixability whatsoever and they nailed the taste.
They tested,
for instance,
for the chocolate version 282 different versions.
They put a lot of money and a lot of time into r and D for this particular
product and they have both way and my seller casing,
so if you want to say improve body composition and recovery overnight slow
release,
you can take the my seller casein or in my case whey protein.
I would take postworkout for instance,
or in the morning.
So check it out.
These guys were really fascinating.
Visit a scent protein.com forward slash Tim,
that's a s,
c e n t p r o t e,
I n.com a sense like first ascent going up,
a sent protein.com forward slash Tim and you will receive 20% off your entire
purchase.
If you want a very quick 20th 30 gram dose to start your day or after workout.
This is a fantastic option.
It is arguably the best that I've found.
So again,
chicken up a scent,
protein.com forward slash Tim.
Hello my little Mogwai.
This is Tim Ferriss and welcome to another episode of the Tim Ferriss Show where
it is my job to distill,
extract,
deconstruct the habits,
routines and tactics of world class performers of all different types,
whether they are billionaires,
chess,
prodigies,
elite athletes or otherwise.
And in this case we have elite athlete,
Maria Sharapova and man.
Oh man did I have a lot of fun with this conversation.
We got deep into the tactics of training and mental performance,
mental toughness and much,
much more.
You can find her on Facebook Sharapova you can find her on Twitter and Instagram
at Maria Sharapova who is Maria Sharapova.
She is the winter of five Grand Slam titles and is an Olympic silver medalist.
She is only one of a handful of players to hold all four Grand Slam titles
including Wimbledon,
US Open,
Australian Open and Roland Garros.
She has held the world number one ranking for 21 weeks and has won 35 singles
titles in her career.
Forbes also named her the highest paid female athlete of all time in 2005
she's now held that title for eight record,
11 years or 12 years.
That is a long time.
Maria garners worldwide press coverage on an off the court with a social media
presence that includes 15.5 probably a lot more at this point.
Facebook fans,
more than 6.5 million Twitter followers,
2.7 million followers on Instagram.
She serves as an ambassador to many of the world's top luxury brands and a
number of fortune 500 companies including Porsche,
Nike,
Avion,
and head.
In 2007 she became a goodwill ambassador for the United Nations Development
Program.
It's you and DP and has made significant contributions to Trenoble related
projects in her native country.
In 2012 Sharapova flexed her entrepreneurial muscles and a debuted her eponymous
couture candy collection,
sugar Hova.
Most recently,
she is the author of a book titled Unstoppable My Life So far.
It describes her story in detail and was done in collaboration with an
incredible writer named Rich Cohen,
which we'll get into,
but a few things that we don't get into.
We don't talk about Meldonium,
we don't talk about the sponsors,
we don't talk about a handful of things that have been talked to death in the
media.
We dig into more of the specifics that you can use,
the specifics that will inspire you and also instruct you that you can apply.
So that was the focus and I really hope you enjoy this as much as I did.
It was a blast and it inspired me,
in fact,
among other things to come to Florida where I am right now,
I have compression sleeve on my right arm.
Why?
Because I'm doing tennis camp.
I'm doing an intense immersive tennis program at the Human Performance Institute
with Jim Layer that's l o e h r and you should definitely check out the human
performance institute with Jim Layer.
It's phenomenal.
And I've been playing my little heart out and tennis,
which I've always wanted to do my entire life for the last two days and have a
few more days to go.
But,
uh,
Maria really piqued my interest in this sport,
which I'd want it to do for so,
so long and put off and I realized,
you know,
rather than doing Jujitsu and all these things that break my body,
the gentle art,
maybe I should try something like tennis,
golf,
not my speed.
I'd rather just go for a hike.
But tennis.
Yeah,
I like the sound of that and I like watching it.
So even if just to get a better appreciation of the sports that I can see the
nuances and details when watching tennis on TV,
tenish said Sean Connery.
All right,
I need to go have a drink and dinner in any case.
Without further ado,
please enjoy this wide ranging conversation with Maria Sharapova.
Maria,
welcome to the show.
Thank you.
I am so thrilled that we were able to carve out time and I have so many
questions.
I will start with a rather simple one.
I'm sitting here drinking tea,
I'm having it Charleston breakfast tea.
And I have heard that you also enjoy tea.
Is that true?
And if so,
what type of tea do you prefer?
What are your Goto teas?
So I grew up in Russia where t it's a big part of our culture is drinking tea in
the afternoons with your grandparents.
So I drank black tea,
uh,
Darjeeling type of tea that was made in the mountains.
I'm in Siberia and I would have it with,
uh,
with raspberry jam that my grandmother would make.
That sounds amazing.
So would you put the GM on a piece of toast and have it or no,
I actually,
I put it in my tea
and I still do that and people look at me very strangely and suspiciously and I
get it.
But I,
it just so many memories of my childhood and yeah,
I do that instead of sugar,
which is pretty much the same thing but,
but is a lot of messier.
It gives you permission and yeah.
You mentioned Siberia,
which is where I want to go next.
You were born in Siberia is,
I understand it,
yes.
But your mother was pregnant with you while in Chernobyl.
Right.
So can you explain what happened exactly?
My parents were from gold medal and it was a very small town,
very close to where the Chernobyl reactor blew up.
And during that time,
just before my mother was pregnant with me in 1986 and they fled,
um,
there is not a lot of information about what happened during Chernobyl.
Um,
my grandparents were living in Siberia at the time from,
from my mom's side and they said,
you need to get out of there.
They were able to get more information about the disaster itself.
Then my parents were able to get to being so close to,
um,
to the area and,
and they left and that's why I was born in Siberia.
Your family fled to I guess Russia right after the explosion,
but right.
You ended up and I guess a warmer place or at least depending on the season.
Yes,
much warm.
Right.
We're about to,
my parents realized,
well,
this is not going to work out over here.
And,
um,
they moved to a resort town,
so ci where it just had the,
the Winter Olympics and,
um,
one of the,
I mean I still consider it one of the most beautiful places to visit because you
have the Black Sea and you have the palm trees in the summer and just an hour
away you have these mountains where the Olympics were held and um,
some of the best king in the world.
And my dad's still skis there all the time.
So yeah,
I definitely,
it's one of the most peaceful places as well.
If I to Russia,
I've never visited Russia.
I've always wanted to.
Are there one or two places that I absolutely must visit in your mind there?
Any particular things that I cannot miss?
I know it's a gigantic place.
I would say skip Siberia
is definitely not my Stussy or do over there,
but I think from a,
from a cultural standpoint,
I would definitely visit Saint Petersburg.
And,
um,
it is still a place that I've never been to,
if you can believe it or not.
And as much as I've traveled around the world.
But my mom goes almost every year.
Um,
a lot of my relatives are there and I just,
I have this enormous,
you know,
respect for the culture and just the city and the people and the way they live.
It's very different.
And you know,
people always ask me as I was born in Russia and I spent the first seven years
of my life there and I've lived in night in the United States ever since then,
you know,
I've never really looked back into living in Russia,
but so much of,
of my heart still remains there.
And then obviously my,
all of my grandparents and my cousins,
I'm all still live there.
And so it's a very big part of my life.
And when people ask me what I think about the country,
um,
you know,
as much as I want to have an opinion,
it is so large and it is so vast and there's so many opinions you can have about
it.
And I really just want to let people experience it on their own and come to
their own conclusions because I think that's one of the greatest things of
travel,
um,
is to not have expectations and to get there and to experience,
and you place.
But Saint Petersburg is on my list and that's definitely a city that comes
highly recommended.
Why have you not been there?
And I mean,
maybe it's something like the,
me growing up in New York,
I'd never ever visited the empire state building or the Statue of Liberty until
a friend from Germany visited.
Is it like that or is there another reason?
Um,
it's because of my schedule.
it's so,
I mean I compete 10 months out of the year and it is a pretty much go to the
same cities every year because the tournament's are all situated in those same
cities.
When I have a holiday break,
which usually consists of a couple of weeks only in November,
I go somewhere warm.
I just escape,
you know,
I put my phone away,
I put just everything on hold a little bit,
um,
and just let my body and my mind recover.
And it just never has been.
Never has come into,
um,
yeah,
into my schedule.
We talked about few and of course there's,
there's California,
there's Florida,
and then there's Sochi.
So going back to Sochi,
is that where you were first noticed?
Yes.
Can you tell the story of how you were first found as it were,
as it relates to tennis?
Yeah,
so Sochi in the summer it was very much a happening place.
It was a scene and it was a lot of,
a lot of people were coming there,
vacations.
We had a lot of little parks and um,
outdoor tennis courts and Ferris wheels and all these types of attractions.
And my father,
who was not a great athlete,
but he played hockey and in school,
um,
he enjoyed playing tennis.
He was not very good at all.
Um,
did it for fun.
And when I was old enough to go with him and my mother had me when she was very
young,
she was only 20 years old,
so she was still studying at the time.
So on,
on weekdays when my father didn't have to work,
you would take me with him to the,
the local park and I would just follow along and we take the public bus to the
courts and,
um,
and I just sit there and I'd watch him,
you know,
grind it out with,
with a competitor of his.
And,
um,
and then I,
I'd see all these little kids playing on,
on the side and they were just hitting balls against the wall.
And,
um,
I didn't have,
I mean,
I,
I didn't have a racket of my own and,
and the one that I was able to get with so much bigger than than myself.
So that didn't really work out.
But I,
I immediately,
something like something drew me to it.
Something drew me to this,
like repetitiveness of seeing these kids try to hit the ball against the strings
of the racket and see it come back from the wall.
Um,
and it was very fascinating.
It was like I had this immediate feeling of I want to be in front of those kids
and I want to show them how it's done.
Yeah.
It was a very,
even though I had no idea what I was doing.
So I think that competitiveness kind of develop then where I was just sitting
and board and watching my father play.
Um,
I just wanted to be out there.
Was it a feeling that you could do it more correctly and just something that you
enjoy?
Who did that you felt intuitively or was it because you noticed flaws in their
technique or things that they were missing?
I'm always curious about this because one of my closest friends,
his name is Josh Waitzkin and the book and the movie searching for Bobby
Fischer,
uh,
we're based on him.
He's thought of as a chess prodigy and he had this experience very,
very early on with chess.
What did it,
I mean,
of course might be difficult to recall what was going through your head at the
time,
but can you elaborate at all?
I think from my perspective,
when you're that young and when you don't know anything about that particular
activity or that sport,
and it was tennis and that moment,
it was really this question of,
can I do that?
I see all these kids doing it.
Do I have the ability to be better than them?
And after observing for of so much of what my father was doing,
just not on any professional level at all,
it just came to my mind that I wanted to do it and I wanted to do it better.
I think there's times in life where things come instinctually and,
and just grasp it and you notice it.
And I think my father definitely noticed I could've kept sitting on that bench
and I just could have kept watching my father.
But there's something in me that was,
that said,
no,
I want to be out there.
I want to be playing and I want to be competing and I want to be learning.
And when I got myself out to that,
the wall where all the kids were hitting the ball against,
I remember a coach.
Um,
there's one coach there.
and he all the locals were,
all the children were going to see him,
um,
on the parents wanted him to tell him that,
that they're going to be future stars.
Um,
they're going to be the next Pete Sampras or the next Andre Agassi.
And he noticed me and only after a couple of weeks and when I was playing and he
pulled my father's side and said that,
uh,
this girl can play tennis.
And after that I started taking lessons with him.
And a couple of years after that,
there was a,
an exhibition that Martina Navratilova was a part of and that was about five and
a half years old at that time.
And it,
the exhibition was being held in Moscow.
So my father and I went to Moscow and I was probably one out of 200 kids in that
clinic that she was holding for these kids.
And after hitting a few balls,
I,
I noticed that she had come up to my father and I don't quite know and what
language they spoke because my father didn't speak any English and I'm pretty
sure she didn't have much Russian.
But between the two and after she left,
um,
I spoke to my father and he said,
well,
the sludge and Martina Navratilova just came up to me and said that you're
talented.
And this was only after her watching me just hit a couple of balls in the midst
of so many other kids.
And,
and that's,
you know,
I look back at that and I,
cause I see so many kids now.
I practiced at a country club and you know,
there's all these just today I was practicing next to,
um,
two little girls are probably seven or eight years old.
I'm just enjoying the game on by themselves and kind of trying to hit the ball
over the net.
And it's hard to envision that talent.
It's hard to see it.
So for her to be able to see that when I was only five and a half years old,
um,
it was pretty incredible.
Do you have any idea,
have either of these,
either the first coach or Martina later told you what they saw?
Have you any idea what it was that they picked up on?
I haven't spoken to Martina about it too much,
but the first coach that I had in Sochi and I just started playing hand,
fortunately passed away,
um,
a few years ago,
but I definitely had this tenacity and I had this will have a focus at a young
age and um,
and tennis is a very repetitive sports,
so you,
it's grinding,
it's just hitting the ball.
And when you're that young,
you're concentration and focus is,
is just all over the place.
You play with,
with the ball for a few minutes and then you want to play with a truck or you
want to play with a doll.
And the consistency in your mind is very limited.
Um,
at least that's what,
when I observe kids,
which is completely normal,
but I had this,
I had this fascination with being able to hit the ball and seeing somebody else
had it back at me and trying to find a way.
Um,
and,
and the racket that I first had was actually,
we had to cut the grip.
I like four or five inches because it was,
it was so much bigger than I was.
And I could barely hold it and it was so heavy.
And so it's just this really funny scene of me trying to figure out how to,
cause when you're just given a ball and a racket and like,
well,
what do I do with this now?
Um,
so I just picked her myself.
They're just trying to find a way to get the ball over the net.
And I had this determination of,
of doing it better and better every day.
And I,
and I stuck to it.
I,
it was never,
I don't remember one day where I didn't want to go down the steps of our
apartment and walk the 20 minutes uphill to get to the bus station and then have
to change buses to them at the next station.
There's never a day where I said,
you know what?
I don't,
I don't want to do it.
Um,
and I think there's,
you know,
that's not something that just,
that you have,
that you can really teach or that,
you know,
you could develop it.
Um,
but I think I just,
I really loved it and I carry that passion.
This idea that you were able to hold constant in your mind,
this fascination of tennis and practice consistently.
What did your context for myself,
what did your dad do for work and you mentioned your mother was studying.
What was she studying?
If you could tell us a little bit about them.
She was studying communications and business and I had a very interesting
childhood because my parents were both,
they're very young and they had no knowledge.
Um,
you know what to do.
I was the first child,
I'm still the only child,
but they were very careful of what the decisions that they made and where I was
going to go and if I was going to go to kindergarten or how long they wanted me
to be there.
And I spent so many hours in the library with my mother while she was doing her
homework or she was studying for an exam.
And then I'd go with my father when he will usually play tennis.
I'm my father.
Worked in construction,
had a fairly normal job.
I would say we were an average family.
I'm getting support from,
from both of our grandparents,
from my mom's and my dad's side.
And you know,
we lived a very basic and you know,
at that time a very normal life.
Did they expose you to a lot of other things besides tennis?
Something's you had zero interest in and you had that kid like distraction or
Adhd,
like inability to focus or jumpy focus.
And then tennis was the one thing that you gravitated towards and really locked
onto or where you like that with everything?
Well,
it,
it happens so fast.
And because I had only started picking up the tennis track when I was four years
old at the age of six and a half,
I was already on an I or a slot flight to America,
so.
Right.
So you didn't have time to really test other things.
And I love the,
I love to play with dolls.
I love to play
doctor.
I love to read.
My mother was very much into education and she's,
um,
she didn't want anything to do with tennis.
She didn't want anything to do with sports.
She danced ballet a little bit and she was,
she brought a lot of the cultural,
um,
the educational,
the learning and the growing in your mind experiences to me.
I mean she would read passages and the novels that I was way too young to
understand.
Um,
but she made me memorize a lot of those passages and something about that,
that repetitiveness.
I never,
I never liked to do it,
but it was a sense of discipline that,
that she taught me in a way that had nothing to do with sport.
And I think that really,
I mean,
I would spend an hour in the evening just memorizing these poems by Pushkin and
thinking to myself,
what am I ever going to use this?
And little do you know,
with years and especially now that I'm older,
you know,
discipline doesn't always come so easy in it.
You have to build its foundations and you have to build the trust with the
people that help you with it.
And I think her influence and her ability to,
to acknowledge that as a young mom was so inspirational and that that
discipline,
it really comes into play as a tennis player because you have to have so much of
it.
I mean their sacrifice and there's,
they're the long days,
but the discipline that you have to carry on with whether it's a good day or bad
day,
um,
just beats everything else.
So I got chills about 47 seconds ago because I'm looking at the time because I
found what I was digging for and it,
I wasn't looking for any particular answer,
but I want to underscore a few things that you said for people who might be
parents because of the 250 plus interviews that I've done for this podcast,
there are a couple of patterns that have emerged in people who've become really,
really,
really good at something really early.
And ultimately you,
I really mastered anything even if at that age,
10,
15,
20.
So the first is that I've noticed,
and it's not for everyone,
but their parents hawk to them at least part of the time about subject matter
above their heads,
so to speak,
or as adults.
And number two is a lot of exposure to books.
Number three was what you brought up in.
This is what I got excited about,
which is developing a tolerance for repetition.
And in some cases for that type of,
uh,
I'm not going to say boredom,
but lack of a variety in some capacity because I think that that,
like you said,
your,
your training that so that it can then be applied to other things.
So you might say,
why am I memorizing these poems is I'm never going to use these poems.
But at the same time,
you're developing the ability to at the thousands of hours that you're going to
put into hitting a ball against a wall.
Yes.
And it's the,
it's the persistence that you're building.
It's the will that,
I mean,
I,
oh,
I believe in any job that we do,
any work that we have in front of us.
Um,
there's a lot of moments that are,
that we look forward to are there projects that we love and that we want to be a
part of.
But then there's the,
the tedious work.
There's the things that the repetition as a tennis player where you have to just
where it's all numbers and where it's just a feeling that you get to a certain
number and you just feel it and you let go and you don't think,
and that's time,
you know,
and that it's you,
you could say,
I don't want to do it.
I want to stop.
I don't want you feeding me any more balls.
But that,
that mental persistence,
um,
I do think you could,
you can develop earlier.
I certainly was able to,
um,
with the help of my mother and,
and also,
I mean I,
when you're young do,
and she was a very young parent and you know,
with the help of her mother and also culturally,
I would say 30 years ago or 25 years ago,
it was very different.
And I felt like I was in her cocoon and I was,
I was grown up in her hands,
which also I think explains the bond that we have today and like the friendship
that we were able to have from that.
And I think that's one of the most important things in my life.
Um,
as I,
as I travel around the world today and I,
I eat a lot of young girls and boys,
um,
whether they play tennis or not,
and I hear their stories and so much of their experiences,
um,
is a very tough and rough childhood where they want to,
they almost want to escape from,
from what what they knew as their family.
And so sad.
I'm personally because the experience that I had in my childhood and,
and it was not,
I'm not saying it was all butterflies and rainbows.
Um,
but as I look back at that experience and how they were handling that situation,
how they were sacrificing so much for myself,
created this bond within my family that was very important.
Um,
and it's,
it's priceless.
And I know that those are not the people that we thought we were able to choose
in our life,
but they are the people that know us the best.
And,
and that relationship,
um,
can do so many wonders in your life
because I feel like your mom is such an important figure in relationship.
I notice that you've been reading memoirs written by women and feel free to
correct anything I get wrong,
but most notably love warrior by Glennon,
Doyle Melton and Jeannette walls,
the glass castle and you called them very strong,
tough emotional books and quote.
What did,
what did those two books mean to you?
Why were they puff and emotional?
What did you take away from that?
I'm very,
I get very inspired by women.
I get very inspired by their,
their brain,
by their actions,
by their toughness.
Um,
I think in today's world and in today's working environment,
and I faced this a lot in my sport where,
you know,
I could be going into a press conference six times in a week and I'm faced with
equality questions and,
um,
you know,
you almost have your back against the wall so many times and you have to explain
yourself and you feel that you've done it so many times.
And
can you explain that just for a second in terms of explaining yourself for
quality questions?
Would you tell us a little bit more about that?
Yeah,
we,
I mean,
quality has been a big,
a big subject in women's tennis for,
for many,
many years.
And,
um,
Venus Williams and Serena,
myself,
um,
have done an incredible job of getting to where we are today with the helps of
the pioneer.
Billie Jean King was the reason why we would make such an incredible living from
what we do.
And the one thing that we,
as,
as professional athletes have to realize is we're not just,
we're not only fighting to win a tennis match,
we're also fighting to be an example.
We're fighting for our voice.
We're fighting to have a pedestal to create that pedestal and,
and to raise awareness of how incredible and how difficult and how each path is
so unique and personal and how we're all able to come through it.
How we are able to share our stories,
who are able to inspire other people and not just the women,
it's the women and,
and men as well.
Um,
do we get enough credit for it?
I don't believe so.
And when I say that,
that's what we have to explain.
I believe that that's,
that that's the feeling that I have at least.
And I don't feel that we have the amount of support that,
that we should be having.
Yeah.
Okay.
Learned man,
I guess would be the easiest way to put it today.
And asking him for advice or on a,
on a few things.
And he said that,
uh,
to help the greatest number of people become an example.
So,
in other words,
you don't have to work hand in hand with each individual person,
but if you have the visibility and exposure as you do to become an example of
potential,
I think that's extremely important.
But it had very unusual beginnings,
all of this in many respects.
Right.
And you ended up at a very young age at the Nick Bullet,
Teary Tennis Academy in the U S which is produced,
you mentioned the Williams sisters,
Andre Agassi,
Becker.
How did you end up there?
And,
uh,
could you tell us a bit about the coaching methodology because that's always
what I'm just so endlessly fascinated by.
My father's point of view after that children's clinic that Martina Navratilova
held was tennis is not,
it was not a big sport at that time in Russia.
We didn't have many champions.
I'm coming out of the country,
I believe at the time it was Ucheni Kafelnikov and Anna Kournikova.
Um,
but other than that,
it was hockey.
It was figure skating.
It was all the winter Olympic sports.
And I mean,
one,
it was very expensive to,
to find the right coaches to find the right facilities.
Especially in the winter time.
So the only real option was America and my father started reading books and
studying the game and he knew that he wasn't a tennis coach and he knew that he
wasn't a great tennis player.
And the smart,
I would say one of the biggest gifts that my father gave me,
and it started from a very young age,
was that he realized that he wasn't the one that was going to be my main coach.
He wasn't the one that knew everything or believed to know everything.
He wanted to get the help from others.
And so he started doing research.
And next thing I knew just before my seventh birthday,
I was on a flight to um,
to Miami,
Florida.
And from there we made this crazy bus journey four hours north to the voluntary
academy and Bradenton,
Florida,
which has,
as you just mentioned,
so many of the,
the stars,
um,
past and present and future.
At the moment,
it's really a factory,
this tennis factory that's grown into other sports as well.
But at the time it was very tennis specific and Nicola Terry was someone that
came with a lot of experience and coaching experience and he has a person was a,
a mentor to me more than anything.
Um,
with the guidance,
with this experience of seeing so many people come in and out.
Um,
so many people come in wanting to be champions,
turned into,
turned into good some,
some people come in and they turn into great and some just turn into champions
and,
and he's seen it all.
So,
you know,
knocking at the door of Nick Bollettieri Academy and the dead of the night was
probably one of the toughest moments in that journey.
And it really began there and they told us there was a little too,
too late or a little too early to be knocking it an academy door.
So they sent us to a hotel and we ended up coming back in the morning and they
put me in a group of kids with probably six or seven kids and instructor watched
me hit a few balls and called over nick voluntary and said,
um,
you have to see this girl play.
And then,
um,
nick saw me play and that's kind of where it took off
place.
So special.
And I ask,
because I always wonder,
I mean in the beginning there must've been something special in the sauce
because there,
there comes a point where the best in the world gravitate to your center if
you've produced a lot of champions.
So then there's a question of is it created or is it,
uh,
sort of a selection bias,
but what makes that place unique in terms of training,
in terms of principles or,
or anything that makes it
damn.
Yeah,
that's a great,
that's a great question because it's,
I see it in two different ways and from a positive view,
I saw it and I still see it as,
first of all,
it's,
it's located in a place where there's nothing else to do.
So you are,
you're going there to be committed to become a tennis player or another sport
that you might be practicing over there.
Um,
do you have no distractions?
The second greatest thing about it is the amounts of,
of kids that were there that were older than I,
it was against whom I was able to compete.
And so every afternoon,
six days a week,
I would play matches against them and I would play sets.
And it was the best learning experience because
creating that,
understanding what you do and who you are as a tennis player and,
and those mechanics,
the basics,
the mind,
the brain of setting up the next shot,
um,
before you even hit it,
that knowledge you get by playing.
And so I had this,
this opportunity.
I'd play kid from China.
I play kid from Europe,
um,
that were,
I was most likely I was one.
I was not most likely,
it was one of the youngest ones at the academy.
I at one point,
I wasn't even allowed to board there because I was so young.
And so I had this incredible experience of coming in terms of competition,
of seeing someone across the net that was two feet higher than I was,
that was stronger than I was.
And I had to figure out how to beat them if I wanted to,
you know,
have my self esteem or be confident or be a better player.
And,
um,
and the other great thing was that nick himself,
he knew what to say and he knew when to say it.
And I think you can be a great coach and I've,
I've had many throughout my career,
but they're not very good business people.
And Nick,
nick understood that you only need just a handful,
maybe a couple or,
or a few players that could really make the academy what it is.
And,
you know,
I boarded with eight other girls for a long period of time and,
and they weren't excited to be there.
They knew that that wasn't their future.
They sometimes didn't even know if that was their college future,
but the money that was going into that academy based because of why they were
there and practicing and competing,
um,
was the reason why nick Bolletieri was so,
so smart.
Um,
and when you needed him,
he was there.
I mean,
5:00 AM he's there on the courts.
He's the one that locks the place until this day.
And that dedication and that love and passion for what you do.
I mean,
that's,
it's incredible.
I just saw him a few months ago.
I spent a few weeks,
their training,
um,
part of my comeback and he was out every single day.
He'd come out for a few minutes,
he'd sit down next to me,
he'd,
you know,
he'd speak to me like I was 10 years old again.
And,
and he's the same nick as he was.
It's so rare.
It's really rare to see that.
And I go there for the same reasons.
I go there because of the atmosphere,
because you see other athletes and,
and it doesn't matter if they're,
if they're in college,
if they're young,
if they're not going to make it just to be in the environment of everyone
training with a purpose,
it makes you better,
it makes you,
um,
I love playing in front of,
you know,
little crowd would,
we'll kind of get around the court that I was practicing on and since I hadn't
been in competition for a long period of time,
it was so great to just,
to have people huddle around the court and watch my every move.
And I felt that adrenaline again.
Um,
because usually in between tournaments I like to practice where it's a little
bit more private and will quiet and was at a tournament,
you know,
it's a zoo
compared to being in a cage of a zoo where everyone's around doing
this sort of no escape until someone just takes you out on a golf cart and,
and away you go.
So,
um,
when I'm home,
whether it's in Florida or California,
I just love the stillness and the quietness of just being on my own.
I don't have a court,
but I go to a country club that I practice on a corner or,
or I trained at a private court as well and just have your peace and quiet a
little bit just to have your mind,
only see your team and the members of your team and then do your work.
And we um,
but being there for that period of time was brought back.
So many memories.
So a few things.
Number one,
nick,
I'm sorry,
I always mispronounce your name.
Anytime I try to say it.
I always,
I think part of my spirit wants to be Italian,
so I try to really throw a spin on it and say what a theory.
But it's,
I always make that mistake.
Love that you said,
but he said he would love that.
Okay.
He goes to this little Italian restaurant every single,
every single day of the week,
so he would absolutely fantastic.
All right,
well then you're welcome nick.
Not I'm sorry.
The next question is related to your experience.
Early on you mentioned that you had these giants across the net.
Meanwhile you're this tiny kid holding this gigantic broadsword basically
because it's so big compared to your body.
I've heard that you had some experienced being teased when you arrived in the u
s and I'd love to hear you talk about that if to any particular examples come to
mind and just talk about what effect it had on you.
Because w w what,
what I have just been mesmerized
might sound weird,
so don't take it as being creepy,
but like just just focused on when I watch you play and compete is just the
toughness.
And you mentioned the grinding and just the,
the toughness that I see as something that I'd like to explore.
So could you talk about the,
the teasing when you got to the u s
I very much felt like I was an outcast from the beginning.
And one of the,
the reasons was because I had arrived in America with my father and,
and our story just didn't make sense to anyone.
So from the very beginning,
everyone just assumed we were crazy,
which if I look at that now,
yes,
we were absolutely there.
This is my,
my parents decision was crazy.
The fact that we come to America and you have the seven year old girl with a
dream to become a tennis player,
that's never going to work out.
And,
and so I,
I,
I sense that.
I felt that I felt that I was different.
I always felt like I was there on a different mission and because I was one of
the youngest ones,
I never had the same interest as the other girls.
And I always knew that my interest and my passion was very different to theirs.
And while I boarded at the academy,
I am over coming back,
um,
and you know,
from practice and my little locker would be open and,
and the only thing I had in that locker was this giant jar of a little animal
crackers
and the fuel of champions,
which by the Diet these days has changed tremendously.
I don't even know where to look when dot when you died is coming on next.
But back then I just remembered that giant jar of animal crackers that I believe
a friend from the academy gave me for my birthday.
And that's the only thing I had in that locker.
And I didn't have many belongings.
I didn't have a lot of outfits or skirts that the girls had.
I didn't really have anyone to do my hair or braid my hair.
You know,
my father would sit me down and I'm on a chair and just cut my bangs straight
across and they never look great.
Obviously you didn't know doing okay.
And so it was always a little off.
I speak English in the beginning.
Um,
I was learning through just speaking with all the other kids cause they,
they talk so much,
you just pick it up and you learn.
And um,
it just made me feel very much alone.
It was,
um,
not that I didn't have it,
it felt like I had a lot in common because we were all there to play tennis,
but it's a mission that I was on and I felt like I was,
was very different.
Um,
and it wasn't that I had to be a champion or I didn't have to be a champion.
It was that I was learning and I was growing to be a better tennis player.
And I didn't know where that would take me,
but knew that in order to get there,
I had to wake up at 6:00 AM and I had to practice to the day and then I would
take a 30 minute naps from 12 to 1230 and at 1:00 PM I'd be back playing matches
and sets until four or five.
And then I have a little bit of homework and then I have to do it again.
And so there was a lot of other interests that the girls had and then posters
and glitter and pictures and David Hasselhoff,
Janet Jackson,
and,
and I had no clue.
None of those was at the time.
And so it was just a stranger.
I was sort of in my own little bubble from,
from a very young age.
Um,
and I,
I look back in those moments and I,
I've gotten that question a lot.
Like,
how did you feel?
Did you feel lonely?
Um,
and one of the other things was that I didn't go to America with my mother
because she didn't have a visa.
So I spent the first two years in America without seeing my mom at all.
And I,
I look back at that time and I,
there's nothing about it that it's sad.
Obviously.
It was very sad to not have that,
that support and not have your,
your mother,
um,
cut,
cut your bangs.
And so instead of your father or him buy you shoes that are so ugly and you
can't,
you don't,
you don't know how to tell him,
but he doesn't have enough money to buy you a better pair,
so you just keep your mouth shut.
Um,
it just,
it didn't feel,
it didn't feel like we were doing the wrong thing.
I felt like I was on this path that I was meant to be on and I didn't feel
lonely.
I didn't feel sad.
It was a lonely time because I look at that and of course I wasn't outcast.
But when you're on a mission to do something or be something and it's not so
much about success,
I think it's just,
you know,
we always think of like having a vision and of course we have goals and we
planted in our minds,
but I never remember one time when my father told me that I had to win Wimbledon
or that I had to win the US Open.
He never made me feel like if I didn't that the world would end.
And I always remember thinking that if this doesn't work out,
we would go to Russia.
And that's absolutely fine cause I felt like I had a completely normal childhood
when I was living there.
Did you feel any pressure
in the
recognition of what they were sacrificing for you to take a stab at tennis?
Or was that just not a factor at all?
Whatever they did,
they never made me feel like it was.
And I think that's one of the reasons why I never felt the pressure of having
to,
when things are having to earn money,
I,
I knew that I didn't know how much money I could earn.
I was never really interested in that.
I,
I didn't know anything that would come with being successful with being a
successful tennis player.
And you never really do.
And I think that's one of the great things in life is that you,
you don't know.
And that it's,
it's an experience and it's for you to experience and for you to acknowledge and
for you to learn from it.
And whether you want to take it or not,
that's,
that's up to you.
It's in your own hands.
But the fact that they gave me this,
this opportunity to create a life for myself,
um,
is incredible.
And now when my father's,
my father remained kind of the leader and the coach of,
um,
of my tennis until I was 21 years old,
he traveled with me to every single tournament.
And after I won my third Grand Slam was,
um,
very mutually.
Um,
he decided to stop and,
and now he's on a permanent vacation and he thinks he's training for the senior
Olympics and he loves to ski and hike and do all those great things.
And I,
and I'm so happy.
And it makes me just incredibly grateful that I can support that.
And I that I can do that for my mom,
that I could do that for my dad,
that they for,
for my extended family.
And um,
and they're the reason why I'm able to do that
rejection or that you don't believe in that word.
Is that true?
Well,
I don't,
I mean it's a very,
it's a very tough word to believe in.
It's a very tough word to,
except I think one of the reasons is,
is because I,
I saw in many different scenarios where my father would say no because he would
open up an opportunity to say yes.
And
so there are many situations,
whether it was a coaching opportunity or whether it was receiving money from
agency,
he had this ability to say no to the things that seem like they made sense,
like the easy way out because he believed that later he'd have a better
opportunity to say yes to bigger and greater things.
Shiny objects fall at the time.
I'm sure they didn't seem so smart.
Not Smart.
SMART,
right.
The short term shiny objects,
So junction,
it wasn't,
um,
there was never a cause I always have,
I mean I always was following and kind of next to my father and seeing the
decisions that he would make a,
I was only a kid and even when I won,
I won Wimbledon.
I was only 17 years old.
You're still a kid and you're still following the guidance and you know,
I'd win a match following that and I'd call it or I'd want to turn them in and I
go shopping in a store and I would call my mom cause I something like quite
pricey.
And I,
I didn't know if I could buy it.
Still asking permission even though I had earned that money,
if I could purchase a piece of jewelry or shoes or whatever it was at the time
that I wanted.
So I was always watching and observing and they never rejection.
I mean you're of course when someone says no to you,
it's easy to say,
Oh yes I was,
I was rejected.
But if you can open up a different opportunity from that point of view,
then you're turning a no into something that's,
that brought you to a better place.
It sounds like you did that with your interactions with
players who were boarding at Nick's tennis academy.
Yeah.
Do you consider yourself an introvert and extrovert?
The blend?
How do you think about that?
I think from a very young age because of sort of the process that I,
that I went through,
um,
and the success that I earned from a young age and winning a major and a grand
slam at such a young age.
And because it became so unexpected,
I went from being someone that was,
you know,
that someone that people scout it to being someone that everyone had analyzed
and knew about and wanted to know more of.
And I created this.
Um,
no,
I,
I definitely put on these horse blinders because if I had not,
my mind would have been everywhere and I,
I think it would have been so easy to be distracted and in those moments and
situations and be pulled in different directions.
Which a Hudson,
it's a slippery slope.
It's very dangerous.
And as a young girl it could have been a disaster to say the least.
And so I definitely remember,
I remember the moment and it was just a few matches before I won level.
Then why are sitting down with my coach and all of a sudden they think it was
before the semi finals of the tournament and all these tourists who had gotten
credentials,
they seem like tourists.
I didn't know who they were.
Um,
maybe they would have,
maybe they weren't,
maybe they were important agents are sponsors,
but at the time they just seem like tourists that are wanted a picture with me
and,
and it really came overnight and that sense of,
wow,
everyone all of a sudden wants something.
Everyone wants something that you have.
Everyone wants to be a part of your success.
I didn't like that feeling.
You know,
I love the feeling of being in a position of,
of showcasing what I could do with my tennis racket.
But that feeling of everyone wanting a piece of that and the feeling of your
opponents,
all of a sudden all of a sudden feeling like just by beating her,
they're not just winning a quarter final of a final and the match,
but they're winning so much more.
Um,
it made me,
it made me feel like I needed to kind of put myself in a bubble to concentrate,
to focus,
that it was going to be that much harder,
that much more difficult.
And I did.
And,
um,
I don't know if I could have done it another way.
What were some of the,
or what are some of the best practices or decisions that have helped you with
that?
Because for instance,
my friend Josh,
I was mentioning earlier who became well known effectively overnight,
particularly with the movie about his life,
uh,
for chess.
He could no longer compete,
uh,
effectively after that because he would go to a chess tournament and there would
be,
um,
I'm making up the age,
but he's something like 13 or 14,
and all of a sudden there 20 girls who want attention and a bunch of reporters.
And a,
he removed himself completely from the competitive scene.
He's one of the most private people I know at this point.
So what,
what helped you,
what kind of decisions or advice or practices?
I think it was surrounding myself with good minds and good people that had my
best interest.
And it's so easy to say those words,
but I know how difficult it is to find those people and even harder now
nowadays.
And it was,
and I saw it in so many different examples of other,
of other tennis players and of their success and their paths after that.
And the people that you all of a sudden associate yourself with.
I think as an individual it's very easy to be affected by the voices that are
next to you because we listened to that and we,
we process that information and all of a sudden we,
I wouldn't say we want to be like them,
but we,
we,
we interpret it and in our way.
But like when I read,
when I read a funny book,
all of a sudden I feel like I'm a comedian or you know,
when I,
I watched this and incredible,
um,
acting by someone,
it inspires me to,
um,
to be an actor.
You know,
it's like there's moments of this that that happens as an athlete you surround
yourself with,
with people's opinions or choices or money and wealth.
And it's very,
it's such an easy distraction.
And,
and I surrounded myself with good people and I,
the friends that I have today where my friends,
when I was a young girl that my manager has managed me since I was 11 years old.
And then my mom is still very much my best friend and another really good friend
of mine I met when I was 11 years old as well.
So I have,
um,
I have this fondness of,
of developing those real connections with people.
And I think it was so helpful for me as a young girl because I competed in front
of thousands of,
and I still do.
And the walk to the tunnel and the walk to a press conference and the walk back
in the hotel room.
It's a very lonely journey and that it's a difficult,
you know,
you're in your mind a lot and you're,
you're thinking a lot.
So when you have,
when you have voices next to you that are the right voices,
um,
then it,
it's so helpful.
But I know how hard it is to find.
But I do believe that that is a big part of my success.
I have some public exposure and have found,
I've made it a lot of mistakes and found it really difficult to identify in some
cases what ulterior motives are or if people start doing me tons of favors,
I now realize there might be something coming six months later.
Uh,
so I'm very hesitant to accept favors,
but I can't even imagine the level,
I mean I'm playing
tee ball and you're in the major leagues in the world series when it comes to
how many people want a piece of you.
And how do you,
for instance,
assess someone if you say have coffee or lunch with them,
what do you look out for or look for me?
And how do you decide whether it's someone you want to see a second time or talk
to a second time?
Uh,
I,
if,
if anything comes to mind,
and this is just passed by frankly,
you've had a lot of practice,
you had a lot,
you've got a lot more practice than I was like,
whoa.
Automatic reply.
I was like,
oh my goodness,
I'm afraid I have 4,091 unread email in my inbox
to the wild.
Do that.
I need to keep my inbox clean.
Then I feel like I have a mess in my head.
All right,
well we'll talk about that next.
But in the meantime,
um,
so
I think it's about,
I love meeting people and I love having conversation and I love being inspired
and you can get so much out of a conversation or about from x by exposing
yourself to being in an unfamiliar territory.
So with people.
Um,
and I'll give you the big kind of an example that was,
I felt like it was important because I'm very much,
I'm always around the same people.
So I have my team,
which is my coach and my fitness coach and my trainer.
And we travel.
I see them more than my family.
We travel probably 260 days out of the year together,
breakfast,
lunch,
dinners,
practice training.
Um,
we know so much of each other.
And then you have a manager and then you come home and then you have your
friends.
So I'm always surrounded by people that I know and that I trust and that I love,
which is incredible.
But I always think that as a,
as a human being and from a perspective of the mind and growth and um,
intellectually when you're put in a situation where you're unfamiliar with
people and you're unfamiliar with their stories or who they are and you have to
ask questions and to get that out,
it makes you a much more interesting person.
And so last year I put myself in this position,
um,
where I had all this time off and it was during the summer and I signed up for
these two business courses in Boston at Harvard business school and I was one
out of the 40 students,
I believe in each of these courses.
And I stay on campus.
And these were individuals who were CEOs and CFOs of companies,
of airlines,
of Microsoft have all these incredible brands.
And I was by far the youngest and,
and um,
probably the silliest and the least knowledgeable one in the room.
But just by being with them,
just by sitting with them,
just by sitting with them at dinner,
by asking them questions,
by feeling a little bit uncomfortable.
I felt like at the end of those three weeks I grew and I grew and,
and it wasn't that,
I mean there were definitely things that I learned that I'm applying and that I
wanted to apply in my business.
But the biggest thing I got out of it was that I grew as a person.
I,
I became familiar and an in a very unfamiliar territory.
I still keep in touch with people in those,
in,
in the classes.
Um,
we have completely different lives.
their CEO's of companies,
they have,
you know,
three or four kids.
Um,
you know,
they travel all over the place and here I am a 30 year old athlete,
but there's so much respect in that room because we're all trying to learn and
to grow.
And so when I,
when you asked me like,
who are the people that you want to meet with or speak to or have a coffee with,
I always think of that and the people that I choose to be with or the people
that I want to learn from.
And then I want to have a conversation with and not just about what they bought
at the flea market or you know,
what they're gonna,
how they're,
how they like their coffee.
But it's about the world and it's about education.
It's about people.
And,
and it's not about right or wrong,
I don't always have conversation because I want to know what makes someone
perfect and not,
I like to hear opinions.
And I got out of that experience in Boston and I know I felt like I grew,
I felt like I stepped up and I got out of my comfort zone and,
and I followed up with them and,
um,
and we still keep in touch about business and um,
projects and things like that.
So it was a very interesting experience personally for me.
Answer and what I think
is healthy for me to hear,
my frankly,
is that I frame the question
by focusing on what to cut out.
How do you avoid this?
How do you find red flags for that?
What do you look for slash slash ulterior motive?
Fill in the blank.
And somebody said to me two days ago that that is a very male way of approaching
trying to solve problems to find the cancer and cut it out to remove it,
to cut it off.
And the way you answered the question was,
you didn't explicitly say this,
but like here's how I choose who to spend time with not,
here's how I decide who to it.
Avoid means.
Does that come with guarantees that you're not going to be disappointed at the
end of it?
You're going to want something from you that you weren't expecting,
right?
But you do in order to to have,
you have to put yourself in a position to find out and right.
And what's the worst thing that,
what's the worst thing that can happen from it?
You don't reply or you don't answer,
you don't get back to them.
Okay.
Right,
right.
It's an acceptable,
acceptable cost of tax to pay the,
so the reframing that you just did,
this is,
this is for me right now in my life at least the really important stuff.
And I,
I suspect this is true for a lot of folks and I'd love to switch gears a little
bit and just ask you about self talk.
So what you are saying to yourself,
and I'll choose something very specific when you are in a competitive situation,
if you look back at your,
you're competitive career up to this point when you've been down and then come
back to win versus when you've been down.
And then last,
how does your self talk for,
can you think of any examples?
Are there certain things that you repeat to yourself consistently when you come
back and win versus maybe things you forget to say or ways that you slip up when
you end up losing?
Is there any pattern to that or consistency
there?
I wouldn't say there's a pattern because what's great about the sport that I
play in the situations that I'm in is that they're all very unique.
And that's what,
that's what makes it so exciting to do this after so many years and after being
this child prodigy.
And,
um,
when I think of like the motivation that I'm able to have till this day and
until that,
that fire is burning,
I'll always keep playing.
But that's the unique part of it is that you,
every day is different.
Every match is different.
You might be confident,
you might be ready,
you might be healthy,
but you never know what's going to happen.
And,
and I'm someone that loves certainty.
I love certainty in my life and I love,
I do enjoy having a plan,
but that's not realistic,
you know?
And,
and there's so much uncertainty in what I do.
So I know that I can prepare my best.
I know that I prepare my body,
I can prepare my mind,
but in any situation that I'm in,
it's always different and you have to react to it differently.
And it doesn't always,
it doesn't always go according to plan.
And I don't always find myself being positive,
but something that I noticed that in my mind,
it was actually in the last match I played and it was a in a match where I got
injured at the end of it and how to actually,
I was up in the third set in Rome and I came into the match being I'm being a
little bit upset.
I was down.
Um,
and just for other reasons and I,
I knew the frame,
the frame work that I had in my mind was that it was something along the,
the words of I can't,
I can't,
I'm not able to,
I don't,
I don't feel well.
I'm not there.
My mind is not present.
And the second that I changed that and I changed it to I will and I kept saying
to myself,
I will win the match and I will win the match.
It was like the instance I remember being down a break point and the
automatically there was something in my body language or my mind,
just the repetition of what I was saying to myself.
It just triggered my body.
I became more aggressive.
I stepped into the court,
I took her second serve and I hit a winner.
And from that point it just,
it,
it changed.
In the end of the match.
I was up,
I believe it was two zero something.
I tore a muscle in my hip but,
and I have to had to give her the match.
But I noticed this,
this crazy change,
which I,
I don't,
I don't really notice as much.
And um,
it was amazing that it just came,
this was a question that you just phrased,
but it was the last match that had played.
But it happens a lot.
I do.
I'm a very,
so I take,
I do take my time in between and my service games,
I walked to the baseline.
I am moved my strings around a,
I do a little pep talk and it's very automatic.
I wouldn't say there's,
it's something crazy or something
like something that
I think it's more,
it's more of like of putting my eyes onto my strings and and having this
repetition that it doesn't matter if I won the point or lost the point that I'm
just on this level,
that I'm on this path,
that I'm on this river that is going to get to where it's going.
No matter what rock is in the way,
no matter what storm is on the way the water is ultimately going to go down the
river and that,
and maybe prep talk is not the right way.
I don't always,
I mean I do think that our mind is always working,
always saying things and you're not always so conscious of it,
but it's this routine that I have and I think it's kind of a safe place for me
because in a match it can be an hour match or it can be a three hour match
match.
And in tennis,
momentum changes so much,
just like in life,
one second.
Everything is positive and you get bad news and you know someone is leaving the
company or someone's not going to work anymore or someone's not healthy or,
and all of a sudden you go from a great day too.
Wow.
And it's just a way for me,
I see those strings and I see my fingers playing with those strings.
And,
and I just said,
I think of being levelheaded and being not overly excited,
not down,
but being in this like medium frame of mind.
I would love to dig into specifically,
and this is related serving and you'll start to notice a theme here that uh,
this is also very self interested because I've never learned how to play tennis
despite the fact that I grew up out on long island surrounded by people on
tennis courts,
most of which I was not allowed on.
I would serve their coffee,
but I'm going to my first tennis camp in the next few months to try to learn to
play tennis.
And uh,
what recommendations would you have?
Don't do it.
No,
besides,
besides don't do it.
Because I've already sort of
jumped off the cliff and I'm trying to grow wings,
uh,
for serving because I think you've hit up to 121 mile an hour serves,
which just makes my eyes,
it's been inside my skull.
I can't even imagine what that looks like.
Uh,
any tips for the people out there?
I'll depersonalize.
Not Tim,
but actually for Tim,
the people out there who would like to,
he better at serving.
Do you have any recommendations doozer do nuts?
Um,
I mean the one thing that I noticed a lot with people that are just starting to
play tennis and it's not just about the syrup but it's an all all strokes is
that they take their eye off the ball in order to see the result or the,
where the ball is going.
Um,
which is a big mistake in the beginning,
especially because the more content I contact you have with the ball,
um,
the more the strings of your racket are going to be on the ball itself.
So seeing,
seeing the lines of the ball,
visualizing that will really help you kind of maintaining like when you lift
your arm up to to hit a serve.
Sometimes we want to bring it right back down,
um,
as we may contact.
So keeping that left arm up,
it's something that I focus on when,
when I make a few errors and yeah,
as a right hander or if it's a lefthander then keeping your right arm up.
Um,
yeah,
I would say those are the two,
two top things.
By the way,
I am the worst.
I'm the worst at coaching or
I don't believe it for a second.
Please do.
Because
someone me the other day,
good advice thing,
I was like,
oh my goodness.
You're like,
I've had enough tennis on one side.
I mean I'm sad.
Probably rather commentate.
I think you just don't like talking about yourself.
I think I don't,
but you are.
I think you probably are a very good coach.
If you're a good player,
you can be,
I think you get the right questions.
Maybe you get coach.
So I'm going to try.
Where do you think tennis players don't,
let's just say novice intermediate waste a lot of time,
like where do they focus too much or spend too much time on and where should
they spend more time?
I think may spend a lot of time on the outcome.
Hmm.
I think that a lot,
a lot goes into the result was it in as it out,
as long as it in the net and it all of a sudden becomes your focus.
It becomes your focus point.
That's why I mentioned like watching the ball as long as you can because it
takes your mind away from thinking if the ball is going to be in or out and
therefore it,
I always feel that your attitude and your,
your body language and I,
I've always thought that that's a very big part of of the game itself and how
you,
how you're able to transfer this body language from a mistake into a winner that
you hit the next ball and a few balls and the,
sometimes it's all it takes because tennis is a matter of really millimeters.
You could do the same thing and the ball just the,
the wind takes it and it's long.
And if you're playing in conditions where it's not windy,
you do the same exact thing and you have the same technique,
but it goes in and one day you're cursing at yourself and you're upset and the
next day you think you just won a grand slam.
So it's a very,
it's a very thin line there.
There's no doubt about it.
But I do,
I think there's a lot of,
there's a lot of attitude that,
you know,
needs to calm down.
When I watch,
when I watch,
um,
no one watched junior tournaments when I watched body language,
when I see facial expressions and looking over on the sides of the court.
And a lot of it is because tennis is so emotional and it's so in the moment and
every single point counts and you wanted to count.
And of course it shows how passionate you are about it,
but the attitude and,
um,
is a very important part of,
of being a tennis player
in addition to the attitude or layered on top of that.
Tonight,
I have promise.
This will be my last question about technique.
In the first month,
if you were,
if you were coaching your son or daughter in tennis in the,
and let's just assume,
they said last thing I want to do is tennis.
And then at age 20,
they're like,
you know what,
actually I want to do tennis just because,
just because dealing with a little kid as a whole thing in and of itself,
but uh,
we could also depersonalize it and just say you're teaching someone you care
about,
right?
What would you make sure they get right in the first four weeks?
What would you really focus on?
So I think the basic techniques,
and even when you're young,
like that's,
that's the main thing,
those are your fundamentals.
So if you start,
if you start,
if you're,
if you need to go,
right and you're,
you're going to big Sur but you turn left from the beginning,
you're,
you're done.
And that's how I,
that's how I've always seen tennis is the mechanical mechanics are important and
they need to be easy.
Like,
sometimes I see strokes that are so complicated and that are so the backswing is
huge and the spins are crazy.
And I think it,
it definitely can be much more simple.
And it's not about power.
It's not about hitting a winner.
A lot of it is controlled power.
Like,
um,
I mean I play a very aggressive and powerful game,
but when I play the best is when it's controlled power.
When I don't want it to be power.
But when my,
when my strokes are simple,
they're not complicated when I'm not trying to grow it as loud as I can,
even though I grew up very loud,
when it's really compact,
you know,
keeping your,
keeping your elbow close to your body instead of having this huge loop.
Um,
and really zoning in on the ball.
I always,
I always see people take their eyes off the ball.
Well,
I hate to say it,
but I think your next book might be about,
I
doubted.
So I'm not going to,
I'm not going to forget to mention it,
but I do want to mention it.
You have a new book and I have more questions.
I won't keep your five hours as much as I want to,
but you have a new book unstoppable,
which I am actually extremely,
extremely excited to read and I don't,
my f my listeners know,
I do not actually always say that.
Uh,
I'm very excited too.
Dig into it.
But can you tell us a little bit about it and then I will give one of many
reasons why I'm excited to check it out.
But could you tell us a why write a book?
Because books,
books are a pain in the ass and I can speak from experience now that I've just
finished reading the audio version,
I know
completed.
I just took a deep breath and I said,
wow.
I said,
wow,
I have so much respect for every book that's on that shelf.
You're like,
I can't believe people do this for a loo.
Who would ever do that?
Well,
you know what,
I,
about three years,
two,
two and a half years ago,
I had a meeting with,
uh,
with an agent and I sat down and she,
she came into the meeting,
I'm talking to me about a potential memoir and it was so far,
it was just an idea that she had.
It was not really even a vision or a plan.
It's just wanted to talk to me about it.
She knew a little bit about my story about moving to America.
She didn't know everything.
And we had this conversation and I came into the meeting,
I'm actually just taking the meeting cause I want it to be nice.
And I never thought that I was ready to write a book and to,
to share so much of what I share in this book about them moving to America,
about facing my rivals,
about my personal life,
about all the experiences that I've had and the 30 years that I've lived.
Um,
and I wrote a few paragraphs myself and she,
yeah,
she was very,
it was interesting cause I left a meeting feeling like,
wow,
I'm really going to write a book.
Aren't die.
And it wasn't anything that she said.
It was just the conversation and her asking me about my story.
And as I started speaking about it,
she was,
her eyes lit up and she said it was incredible.
And I looked at her like,
Huh,
really?
Cause I,
I don't know,
I always,
I think that everyone's story is special and everyone gets to where they are and
their own certain unique ways.
And I know I just don't go about my life thinking that I know that it's very
different and that it's maybe one in a million and that we,
my family took a chance,
but I don't walk around thinking,
Wow,
this is brilliant.
And so I walked out of that meeting thinking,
wow,
I might,
I might be a writer,
I might write a book.
And so I wrote a few paragraphs myself and,
and just a few weeks time we got this offer with no questions asked,
no,
is this going to be gossip?
No.
Who's,
who's going to be part of the story?
Um,
I signed with Sarah Crichton at FSG and she wanted to hear my story.
And I don't know,
it just,
it,
it inspired me.
It made me feel like there was a lot of inspirational work that I could put on
paper for,
for people to read.
There was a writer that I had in mind whose name is rich Cohen,
who you're very familiar with.
You made such a great choice.
That was one of the things I was going to bring up just for people who don't
know.
And I hate to interject,
but this is another thing that made me so excited.
So yeah,
Rich's written just some incredible books and their wine tribes book was credit
and also,
I mean the fish that ate the will,
right.
A which a lot of people have heard of,
you know,
one of my,
uh,
actually two or three friends,
one of their favorite books of all time.
So I'll let you carry on.
But rich,
you made,
you made a great choice.
When I read Jerry wine was book or somewhere on holiday during my off season in
November,
probably I'd say seven years ago.
I said to myself that if I ever write a book that Rich Cohen would help me do
it.
And when I made the decision to write this book,
I had my agent,
um,
find out who rich going was,
where he lived,
what he did,
if he had time to do this.
I didn't even know if this was a possibility.
So I let him,
and this was so fascinating because I,
I met with three writers and I met him at this swanky New York hotel and,
and he walked in there just looking like he did not belong.
And I knew exactly that this was my guy.
That's my guy,
that's my guy.
I knew that he,
he knew where he was going.
He took the train,
he had a shoulder bag on and he was just looking around.
He was simple.
And our conversation was very simple.
It wasn't anything over the top.
And I knew,
but I knew from just meeting with him for 30 minutes that he,
he was a genius in his literature and that's where his genius has come out.
It's on paper.
And I got that sense from the beginning.
And another reason I chose to work with him was because I,
throughout my life I have,
I've been influenced by a lot of male figures.
So my father,
my coaches,
Nicola,
Teri,
Robert Landsdorp,
um,
my manager and I wanted,
I wanted a rich to sit down with these people.
I wanted him to spend time with these people to really get an understanding of
the characters that were part of my life,
that,
that made me who I am today.
And I knew,
and I thought of these people,
I thought of my father and I thought of the person that he would give the time
to,
that he would open up to,
that he would share with.
And that I think that was one of the biggest reasons that,
I mean,
he and my father spent turning over a week together just talking and talking
and,
and it wasn't even life life talking stories.
And then my father was able to tell stories that I,
that I read in the book and I'm,
I was like,
wow,
wow.
I was so young that I don't,
I don't remember it.
And yeah,
he was,
we spent so many weeks together.
Um,
I love the way that he worked.
I love,
love the questions that he would,
I just love the simplicity of him as a human being.
I love the filter.
Also,
it wouldn't have even occurred to me,
at least in this conversation if you hadn't mentioned it,
but the fact that it's not just who you like and who's writing you like,
but who other people will talk to.
Because a big part of my story is the other people that influenced my life.
And because I started my life at a young age,
I started this,
you know,
this crazy move and this crazy profession and,
and these people were so influential and they're very much a part of this.
Part of the reason that I'm here
subtitle in my life so far,
you've a lot of decades left.
Uh,
well,
you know,
I want to,
I wanted it to be called to be continued
and I got shut down really fast.
That's basically telling everyone to get a new book.
I was like,
wait a second.
That's been my dream ever since.
So yeah,
because when I would see um,
memoirs written by or autobiographies written by young no to younger
individuals,
I would think to myself,
do they really think that their life is over and that this is all they have to
tell.
So of course when you say that you have a book come out a memoir when you're 30
years old and
I was just so like I have this vision of,
of calling it to be continued,
but they're like that you have to explain what's inside the pages and not what's
coming out next.
That's like,
no,
well you could do
this my life so far.
Then you write your coaching book that you promised me you'd right.
Then the third book can be unstoppable.
My life continues or it continues.
And so I think you could get a number of,
can you play with it?
I know you can play with it.
You can play with so many different types of,
I'd love to ask some some micro questions just about routine and perhaps a
couple of other rapid fire questions that I'd like to ask before I get to that.
I know you've had,
you've had some shoulder issues in your life.
Uh,
I've had shoulder reconstructive shirts to surgery and improved sort of mobility
and recovered largely.
Yeah.
Yeah,
I know now,
fortunately it's on my nondominant arm.
What I was going to ask you,
you mentioned some of your heme,
the fitness coach and so on.
Right.
What have you found to help most?
Are there any particular exercises that have made you more resilient against
injury?
So for injury prevention,
what are some of the components of,
say,
your fitness program that you think have helped most?
I liked that you used the word prevention because a lot of,
a lot of the makeup of an athlete is about prevention and it's,
you know,
we,
we do so much to try to prevent injuries and we don't always succeed,
but a big part of the little exercises and the tedious things and the repetition
is,
is that,
and I would say the biggest component of uh,
because I want their shoulder surgery is the consistency of keeping up with the
exercises.
You know,
there's a lot of exercise out there and they're all great,
but it's very rare that you keep doing them.
And I start every morning after my shoulder surgery,
before every practice.
I have a routine with a rubber band.
It's not that,
that's not a rare routine for a tennis player.
We all warm up.
We do about a 30 minute warm up before we even get to warm up on the core before
I matched.
So there are a lot of little scapular exercises that you do,
um,
theraband,
right?
Yeah.
And a lot of it is not even about the weight that you have or the resistance of
the theraband,
but it's the repetition that you do.
So the feeling that you have in the back of your scapula or um,
and the tendons of your shoulder is that it starts burning.
That's when you really know that the little muscles in between the big ones are
firing and the,
the more consistent you are with that,
the bigger chance of you getting healthy and also preventing something else to
happen because your body always compensates.
So if I have an injury,
um,
in on place,
you,
you're,
your body's like the brain is so smart that it starts using other parts of the
body and all of a sudden you feel it somewhere else.
So,
yeah.
So the consistency of following through and really keeping at it is for me is
always the most challenging thing.
And I see people give up on it.
Are there any particular exercises that you wish you'd incorporated?
So I grew very fast and that's something that I speak about in the book as well.
Um,
because none of no one in my family is tall.
I'm the tallest one.
And I talk about the struggles that I had as a teenager during that period of
time.
And in my father says it was,
I grew because I had the soil to grow and that I needed it for my sport and that
it was everyone's wish,
including mine,
that I would be taller so I could be served from a higher angle or that I could
be more powerful.
But with that comes,
you know,
you're a little bit less explosive,
you're not as mobile,
you know,
little differ.
And I think movement,
um,
you know,
in tennis you have so many movements that are just back and forth and changing
direction.
And so I work a lot on the joints.
I work a lot on balance,
um,
balance of the core and then that balance on,
on little,
on stabilizing platforms where I really work,
my ankles and my knees,
make sure those are all aligned and not wobbling too much when just gaining the
confidence.
Um,
and sometimes they seem like the most,
the simple exercises,
you know,
if you take a picture of them or a video of them and you,
they're the ones that you don't want to post because it was someone that thinks
you're not doing anything.
You know what I mean?
Like they're not impressive looking.
Yeah.
You're not an Olympic weightlifting.
No.
Not doing any RDL owls.
But the little things that are,
that that take time and that looks so simple and that are boring are the ones
that really,
you know,
not only do you keep your focus but you keep your strength and the balance.
So yeah,
and I work,
I work on my core a lot cause I,
I do believe that that's,
you know,
it is the center of your body in a control.
So much of it puts the body together.
It's like the glue.
If you could only choose one or two core exercises to do,
what would they be?
Oh Wow.
Um,
I love using the TRX band and did that yellow band and putting it up,
um,
hanging in and putting my feet in it.
And then doing a plank.
And then I'm sort of doing like bicycles while you're in a plank,
when your feet are in the TRX.
I like that.
So you're crossing your mid line with your needs.
Yes.
So I mean that's a little bit on the advanced side,
but I know that your audience can do it.
Yeah.
And you can also folks,
if you have really tough top of your feet,
you can do that.
I actually have some rings there.
I'm looking at outside on my patio set up at sort of pushup height and you can
do something very,
very similar.
Exactly.
Um,
and I do a lot on the physio ball and that's always simple.
Most gyms have it.
Um,
even just the,
also known as a Swiss ball if people Swiss ball see ball.
Yes,
there are a lot of terms.
Um,
yeah,
I like doing all different types of planks were just floor planks and extending
your arms are extending your legs one at a time out.
So it's like an element of surprise and balance or it's not just static.
Right.
And for those of you who've heard my conversations with doctor Peter Tia,
he is a huge fan of doing a different plank motions on the physio ball.
And just to your point about unimpressive exercises.
So I have completely changed my lower body performance and just stability in the
last six months using slant boards,
which make you look like you're on the most unenjoyable drug imaginable.
Uh,
but it's this tiny tiny adjustment that I feel like has changed my entire lower
body by focusing on the feet.
Uh,
so here,
here now
I have shoot,
I'm also looking at them right now I have a bottle of geranium essential oil.
I know it's not a smooth segway,
but bear with me.
I have a bottle of training,
I have a geranium because it was recommended to me by someone named Nicholas
McCarthy who is a one or a one handed concert pianist
who uses Geranium when he is writing and composing because he found it helped
keep him alert without overstimulating.
I'm so,
he was relaxed and alert.
So at
at some point,
uh,
I saw a video view when you're 14,
a star in the making.
That's right.
Candles and aroma therapy oils.
Are you still into that?
I am.
See the room that I'm in right now,
I have
all these oils and all these candles and yeah,
I,
well for me it's about like this feeling of being in your home environment and
comfort.
That's something that you don't get when you travel so much.
So when I do,
it's kind of my way of failing.
Like every morning I turn on my incense and my candles and I have my coffee and
it just,
the smell,
it's like the smell of being home.
What's the Goto morning instance?
It's a Moroccan scent.
I don't exactly know what's in it,
but it smells like I'm in Morocco even though I've never been there.
Another one that's on my list.
Do you not bring those smells with you
when you travel?
I don't,
you know,
interestingly enough,
I,
when I go on a trip,
like I know that that's my work.
I like,
I like leaving those things behind because it makes me feel that I'm going there
for a reason and I'm not going there to be comfortable.
I'm not going to be there in my environment.
I'm there to do my job and I will come back home and I'll have everything,
I'll have my friends and I'll be around my family.
But when I leave it's like there's so many times when I've left,
I've gone on a plane and it's the middle of the day and Manhattan beach and the
sun is shining and everyone's playing volleyball and,
and I look at that and I'm like,
it's hard.
It's definitely hard.
No,
my friends are out there and I want to be out there and I want to be enjoying
the sunset,
but I know what I'm going out there for.
I know that come a time when I have five days off,
I'll be able to take my friends on vacation and treat them to a beautiful time.
But now is my time to work.
And so I like leaving those things behind because it makes me feel that there is
a PR,
there is a prize at the end of it.
There is something that I'm,
that makes my job different.
I don't know if that makes sense.
It makes perfect sense to me.
And it actually relates to something that made me smile when I read it.
I was looking at a transcript of a conversation that you had and this requires a
little bit of context,
but I'll shorten it.
Uh,
I hate the word balance.
What is balance?
Because it's 50,
50,
that means you're only giving 50% to both things.
So I've always disliked the phrase work life balance because it implies blending
to me and I like to keep them very,
very separate.
All right.
Do you think that's something that has helped you more than hurt you or
challenged you in terms of relationships,
outcomes and everything else?
I mean,
do you think there'll be a point where you trade that or change your mind about
that?
I definitely think that it's challenged me,
challenged the way that I think.
But I do,
I read the one thing a few years ago,
I carry guilt Keller and I really,
it kind of hit home for me when you saying that you,
when you wake up in the morning,
you put your focus on this one thing of what you want to accomplish during the
day,
which seems like a no brainer.
Right?
It seems like okay,
that's,
that's the way that everyone should do it.
But it's so much more complicated than that.
And for example,
when I leave for a trip and you know,
one of my good friends is getting married in August and I'm going to be either
in Cincinnati or Toronto competing at a tournament.
I know that I'm not there for my friend.
It's a big,
it's a big day,
it's a big event.
Um,
and yet I have this career in front of me that is taking priority.
And I could say,
you know,
if he'd give many examples of my personal life as well,
but those are choices.
Those are your choices.
And those are,
I think,
I don't think that there is a 50 50 balance.
I don't,
that hasn't worked for me.
I've always felt that I've had to let something go or I sacrifice something.
If I'm just 50 50 I'm never 100% and I want to be 100% you know when I train,
when you train hours on end,
when you give so much of your,
of your body and your mind to this one profession and whether it's me playing
tennis,
whether it's something else,
I don't want to come into one of the biggest moments in biggest stages of my
career and feel that I didn't do everything that I could
and,
and some,
I do think that some people are okay with that feeling,
but I am not and that's my choice and it all comes down to choice.
I think we all have them,
but as long as that were,
as long as I'm able to say,
and I do believe that it's for other people as well.
As long as we commit to that choice and not regret that choice or don't give up,
don't allow ourselves to regret that choice,
then that's when,
that's when it's the right formula for us.
You have many,
many,
many choices that are put in front of you and you have people to help.
But I would love to talk about choices in the morning.
So first thing in the morning has come up a number of times and I'm rather
obsessed with morning routines.
So you mentioned the incense,
Morocco,
you mentioned the t Darjeeling.
Uh,
when you wake up,
I'm do you eat breakfast right away?
What does the first 60 to 90 minutes of your day look like?
And what are,
what's the script?
What is the,
what does the algorithm for different all the time.
Okay.
What about Breck?
Is Breakfast consistent?
Do you have sort of the,
for instance,
for this week,
like what is your go to breakfast?
So I'm in training right now.
I'm getting ready to play all these hardcore tournaments.
And so for the last weeks I've been helion injury.
Now that that's,
um,
that's all good.
Um,
I'm back into the routine of just intense training every day.
And so,
you know,
I started a particular time in the morning.
Um,
I like to wake up early.
I like to go to bed early.
So I wake up early.
I like to get about eight to nine hours of sleep.
Sleep has been a big part of,
I just feel like the makeup of how I feel,
um,
of the energy level that I have.
Yeah.
I wake up at six 30,
I usually have to be ready by nine for practice.
So I use that time and kind of depends.
Like,
um,
right now I have a few,
I have a couple of businesses that I'm a part of.
So a lot of like the first hour,
hour and a half I spend,
um,
maybe on a conference call cause that's usually,
you know,
afternoon time in Europe.
So I'll do one of those.
I'll answer a few emails that's coming in from Europe,
have a candy brand.
So we have to make a lot of decisions on that on daily basis.
Is it true
beyond this,
but is it true that you can,
you were considering legally changing your name,
your last name for the 2013 USF for sure.
Good idea.
Genius idea,
genius idea.
Proved to be very difficult,
but
you're taking,
taking conference calls.
I do that work for the first hour,
hour and a half with a cup of coffee that I have to have in the morning.
Um,
lactose free milk.
What type of lactose?
Free Milk.
Sorry.
Just straight on lactose free milk.
Oh,
I see.
So it's not all almond milk.
Coconut milk.
Lactose free.
Real milk.
Yeah.
Practice three.
Now for coffee.
I do Nespresso.
Simple.
Got It.
And yeah,
I think it's all,
for me it's all about the phone.
It's,
I have to have like the right phone
and then,
and then I usually,
when I'm getting ready,
I turn on a podcast and I listen,
kind of depends on the mood I'm in,
whether it's about health or I want to hear about someone's life or someone's
experiences.
Um,
I'll turn that on.
So by the time I get my stuff ready for the whole day of practices and kind of
brushing my teeth,
um,
I,
I listened to other people share.
What are some of your favorite podcasts?
Hm.
Uh,
well,
a good friend of mine is Louis,
so I listened to his,
um,
Iverson two years,
a bunch and past the six or eight months I would say,
um,
to Dan Harris's.
Um,
I listened to a fashion one.
Yeah,
a little bit of everything.
So Dan Harris,
this is Dan Harris of 10% happier.
Yes.
All right.
Why do you listen to Dan Harris?
Because I was going to ask you if you have a meditation.
It's,
it's interesting.
Someone asked me the other day,
do you meditate?
And I said,
I don't,
but I really feel like I do because I listened to so many people speak about
meditating that I really,
I feel like I do.
I had to think for a second.
I almost said yes.
And I was like,
no,
no.
Actually I don't meditate.
But I listened to people speak about it.
Um,
and I have a little bit,
I've tried,
I've done it and I,
I enjoy it.
Some of it is,
it feels a little cultish,
plenty of that floating around.
But you didn't like the like cat's paw and black roses I sent you.
Is that what you're trying to tell me?
I like when people,
um,
I'd like to hear about people's experience of life changing experience.
And I think that's what,
that's what really interests me is how something can affect a person,
whether it's reading a book,
whether it's hearing a mantra,
whether it's meditating.
Um,
so that's why I like listening to people speak about their practices or how it's
influenced their life or what they were going through that required that.
Yeah.
I love learning from people's experiences.
So I think that's one of the reasons I listened to his.
So I think,
I think you've been meditating your entire life because of your kind of feelings
and your comfort level with Rep.
Right?
I think that is one in the same in a lot of respects.
I mean,
the one thing that I've,
and I don't,
I don't really know where I got it from,
but I,
one thing that I do,
I realized that our thoughts are so spread out and that they go in so many
different directions.
And when I,
when I noticed that my mind goes to places that are so unnecessary.
When we,
when I create my own stories that are so far from the truth,
I bring it,
I bring it to,
I bring it back to the center of my breath.
So I do think about just breathing.
And that's not like me sitting in a chair and having thoughts are saying,
okay,
now I'm going to meditate for 10 minutes.
That's just me.
Whether it's on a practice court and things are not going well or I'm making so
many EHRs and all of a sudden I just create the story that is so that it's so
far from the truth or the reality.
It would be an example of that.
So say I,
you know,
say my coach has me say,
I studied some video analysis and he showed me a particular stroke that he wants
me to work on or a particular movement and he,
you know,
he's at,
this is,
that's incorrect and this is,
he shows me an example of what he thinks I should do a little differently.
And so I go on the practice court.
I started doing that and with repetition,
I'm not getting the outcome that I'm,
that I wanted.
And so I plant the story that no,
he's incorrect.
He doesn't know what he's talking about and,
or you know,
or that,
no,
actually this is not,
I,
this doesn't feel right.
This doesn't feel natural.
I'm not going to feel natural.
It doesn't feel natural now.
It's not going to feel natural in a competitive state of mind.
And I know all those things are completely not true.
Those are all things that I'm putting in my brain.
How do you catch that?
What do you say in your own head when you catch it?
I'm so aware of my surroundings and I'm really aware of,
of like the choice of the kind of the inside choices that I make.
I've had sort of this feeling from a young age where I know how my mind can
affect others or like my surrounding and myself included without having to say
one word.
Yeah.
So I try to bring it back to my breath and um,
or sometimes changing those words completely,
even though those are also not true,
but they're much better than the negative outcome that you're putting out into
the world.
I interrupted at some point,
which I'm prone to doing cause I get all excited.
I also want to recommend,
I want to recommend hardcore history with Dan Carlin.
If you haven't heard it,
I would recommend starting with tomorrow morning wrath of the cons is what I
would recommend starting with it is my favorite podcast of all time and he does
one episode every six to 12 months.
Uh,
but you will see why they are incredible.
And uh,
also I want to,
I'd be remiss if I didn't say thank you to Lewis,
a mutual friend who made,
who made the introduction very,
very good man.
I,
I think we didn't get around to it cause I got all hoppity and jumped in.
Right now you do this,
you have the espresso with very important foam.
You have some conference calls,
you take care of sugar Povo and so on.
Then my phone's goes,
my phone goes in my bag for the next few hours and I train.
When do you eat?
What do you have for breakfast?
Um,
I eat probably like 30 minutes before I get to,
to practice,
so I,
okay.
So for two,
for the first two and a half,
three hours.
Your ninth grade?
I have a liter of water
and a cup of coffee.
Is it special water?
No.
Okay.
How's the on water?
$27 southern California water.
Got It.
And so I drink that.
I drink my coffee and then breakfast,
I usually make myself a smoothie or a green juice with spinach and Kale and Chia
seeds and coconut water and all the other Greens.
Cucumber.
And I always have a piece of Rye bread kind.
That's kind of the European.
Um,
I love Rye bread.
So I start with that and I either put some goat cheese on it,
a piece of protein or avocado
and some berries.
And that's,
it
sounds delicious.
I love,
my tendency is to eat a whole loaf of Rye bread.
If I allow myself a little bit,
I'm not very good at that moderation thing.
Well,
the thing I would,
the thing about Rye bread is that I,
I don't think that it's so good.
So that I,
I mean I think better than some other breads,
but it's not like,
like sour dough I love,
but I don't,
I don't eat regular bread that much.
So if I was eating a piece of sourdough,
I'd probably have three pieces.
But Rye bread is in between.
It's
digestible.
It's not a snickers bar.
Exactly.
But you don't want too much of it.
All right.
Now this is,
this is a smart approach.
Just a few more things in the last few years or just in recent memory,
right.
What is a new belief or behavior or habit that has greatly improved your life?
Does anything come to mind?
I mean,
one thing that I had to go through in the past 15 months was being away from my
sport because of the suspension that I faced.
And I went through this time period,
um,
obviously with a lot of questions and questions of whether I would return to
sport,
whether it turned to the sport that I played.
But during that same time,
I also realized,
and I had a chance to stop and really recognized how and what I've really done
in my life and my career to inspire others and to,
and I,
I,
I'm using the word inspire a lot because that's how I kind of see other people
inspire,
you know,
my life.
But I had so many moments in instances where I would come across people that
would start a conversation with me and tell me kind of how I've influenced their
kids or how I've,
how they've seen me compete.
And then I'm,
you know,
they admire my,
my spirits so much and that they can't wait to see me back.
And I don't,
I never had that realization before,
which sounds crazy and,
but I never really understood or I don't,
I don't think I really understood.
Um,
maybe it was selfishly how much I impacted other people.
Did you notice that because PR madness,
it was stressful and you saw that as a counter,
a counter balance or why do you think you noticed it?
I think I noticed it because people are so many more people came,
had had the courage to speak to me and which,
which usually,
um,
you know,
people would come up to you and ask for an autograph or ask for a picture and it
would just be,
you know,
what,
a few seconds of your time.
But these were instances where people would come and have a proper conversation
with you about how they're so they can't wait to see me back and they can't wait
to see me play and what,
what I mean to them.
And it was just different.
It was a different communication.
It was a different way of talent.
And every person helped me feel better.
There's no doubt.
But it was,
um,
it was chefs coming from the kitchen and they were pilots coming from the
cockpit and it was just an experience.
I,
I don't think I would have ever felt,
and maybe because I never wanted to feel that like huge responsibility that I
did have this impact and I always wanted to keep impacting and always be the
right example.
Maybe that,
that's why I never quite,
but I do think that's a consciously,
I didn't want to give into that because maybe that would have added more
pressure.
You know,
because as I said before,
like my parents never made me feel that if I did or I didn't make it,
that it would be all right to go back to where we started.
Yeah,
it was just,
it was a very eyeopening moment.
You had your first sponsor is,
I understand that when you were 11,
when you were getting that amount of attention and
adulation from fans and chefs and so on,
it would seem to me a very human temptation and very easy to get a very big head
and for that to fix your life and performance.
And so on.
How do you,
how do you counteract that or how do you avoid that?
Because that's been the downfall of many,
many people who've been in the limelight for various things.
I will say that I'm,
I'm a fairly realistic person and I know I've been through a lot.
And so I faced,
I faced a lot of grief.
I faced a lot of press,
I faced a lot of success.
I faced a lot of
boardroom meetings.
I've seen a lot,
I've seen a lot in my years.
And
at the end of it is,
it's all,
a lot of it is,
is superficial and a lot of it almost seems not human like superhuman,
but behind everything,
there's a very human person.
You know,
there's a very normal,
there's a,
I'm very much a simple human being that,
I mean,
I,
I've been fortunate to make good money from my career,
but those things are never things that make me the happiest.
And I know that.
And I realized that the values that you have in your life are,
um,
I much smaller than that.
And they bring so many more rewards than money could ever,
could ever bring new.
Of course it's helpful.
And knowing that I,
you know,
it puts a huge smile on my face that I can,
that I can support my grandparents and then I can buy them a home and that I
know they're going to be comfortable and they can have their garden and grow
their cucumbers and that my cousins can have a proper education.
And that feeling is incredible.
But that's,
and that's a feeling that,
of course,
money brings you.
But I think the value,
I mean,
like I said,
the relationship that I've had with my parents,
you know,
they're,
they're also very strong people and they,
they will tell me if,
if something,
you know,
if they're,
if they see that something's going on or if my,
my decisions are not correct and they're very real.
And I like,
I surround myself with real people,
you know,
I want to,
I'm a very honest person myself.
I think that's part of the Russian character.
I say it like it is.
Like I said,
I'm very straight on about what I feel and,
and that's sometimes gotten me into trouble,
you know,
just based on maybe I should keep a few opinions to myself,
but I like this idea of tell me how you feel about things.
Tell me,
tell me straight up,
you know,
don't go around,
don't,
you know,
maybe I,
this,
this word may be is,
is brutal.
It's like neither here nor there.
So it's hard.
It's definitely hard because from a young age I could have made so many
different decisions that could have gotten me to different places.
Avoided making one of the best decisions that your parents helped you make.
I mean at that age is a lot of decisions that my parents made,
but I think it,
from a a business point of view,
I've been been able to be associated with many great brands.
Um,
and there is a lot of opportunities,
especially when I was young to make,
um,
what I like to call a quick money.
It's like,
why are,
why are in the bank,
you show up for a shoot and you do it and you smile and you leave.
And,
and there you are.
Um,
and that is,
it's not that,
it's,
it's great that you have this company and this brand that you know,
has tracked you down and I seen you in a,
studied you and wants you to be a part of their brand.
But I've always felt like the best decisions I've made are based on real
partnerships,
like real understanding of what a company of what myself wants from each other
and why we want to work together.
And I really believe that's one of the reasons I've,
I've had these partnerships for such a time.
Um,
I mean,
one example is with Nike.
I mean it's,
it's so much more than just me wearing a swoosh on the court.
Um,
like I,
I go into a store and I take pride in and back.
That looks,
I was,
well actually I was walking around the other day and someone came up to me and
said,
wow,
you look like you could,
you could be like a Nike billboard.
And I was,
you know,
and you kind of knows it.
And I,
I looked,
I didn't know I give that was,
you know,
funny or not,
or they were like making fun of what I was wearing,
but I looked at her and I was like,
yeah,
and this,
so while you're Maria Sharapova of course you are,
they pay you to,
they pay to wear that.
And I said,
no,
actually you have no idea how happy I am to where this,
um,
like you,
you kind of grow a fondness of the people that you work with of the,
there's so much that goes into a campaign,
a,
a product a and I love that stuff.
Okay.
I purse.
I love knowing.
I got,
I went to the Nike Campuses,
um,
after my Harvard experience and I followed around.
Um,
I wanted to meetings and I kind of shadowed,
I was like a little ghost and all these meetings because I wanted to learn about
like product developers
that was at Beaverton.
All right.
Yeah.
Nice.
So I went into these meetings and I just,
I wanted to know why a product is dropped and why this material is used and why
that material was being developed.
And um,
there's just so much incredible technology.
I just,
I love fashion.
I love creativity,
so I got to learn a lot about that.
But you take great pride in the people that you work with and,
and the decisions that I,
that I made,
um,
that started with either a friendship or a partnership where you understand the
company and you know,
the people have,
are the ones that have grown.
I mean,
you're playing the long game and a lot of ways,
I think there are many people who feel like they know a lot about you.
So my last two questions are about things that people might not know about you.
And hopefully there's a lot of that in this conversation already.
But the first one is if you had to give a Ted talk about something you are not
known for no tennis.
All right.
Uh,
for instance,
what would you talk about?
What is the,
the personal obsession that few people know about or,
or something you're good at that few people know about that you would talk about
or anything.
Wow,
I'm good at,
but I,
and I don't know if I necessarily do a Ted talk on it.
I have this year I have a huge passion for architecture and um,
yeah,
I've,
I think I've always said that if I was in a tennis player,
I would love to,
I would love to be an architect.
I find it's,
it's like my,
it's my happy place.
Like when I am able to drive around palm springs or drive around Tuscany and see
the differences and beams and windows and um,
like I love studying that and I just,
I spent a few years building a home myself and that process that could jail if I
had the time,
which I don't have at the moment,
I would just do for fun.
Um,
so yeah,
that would be something that I'm passionate about,
but not many people know.
What do you like about it?
And do you have any favorite types of architecture or architects?
Yeah,
absolutely.
Some from Neu tread to frank Gehry.
Um,
I love like the indoor and outdoor field and I love one when architects are able
to bring nature into a home and make it feel like you were living outside,
but you're kind of in this cocoon environment.
I don't know if that makes sense.
Um,
but I've,
Oh yeah,
I've just always been fascinated by how someone can have an idea and draw some
lines and two years later you have structure and you have placement and you have
a floor plan and you have this maze.
And it actually started from a young age because I,
growing up in Florida,
I went,
I was invited to um,
for a few sleepovers and I would go to a sleep over at a rich PR.
That time is like a rich person's home that had four or five bedrooms and I'd
never seen a home that had four or five.
What are all these rooms for?
Why is like two dining rooms?
Like why isn't one enough?
Um,
and that's when I became fascinated with floor plans and um,
how like something connects to another thing and like the usage of space and,
and then details like colors and materials.
Um,
yeah,
it was just always really appealing.
What is your personal favorite color?
Um,
I love neutral colors,
so I love grays and darks and no browns.
Wow.
I don't want to say black cause that's,
I mean when I say someone,
a little girl asked me the other day,
what's your favorite color?
Because she wanted,
she wanted to draw something for me and I was about to say black and I was like,
oh no,
she's not going to like me if I say black.
So now every time someone asks me my favorite color,
I'm like,
ah,
yellow.
It sounds so much happier than black.
I guess it's hard to say.
Do a little girl
black like the grim reapers Cape.
Exactly.
So I ended up with yellow.
That's your cover story.
Very last one.
And uh,
we'll see what we get is what is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you
love?
And I'll give you an example,
an example of this.
Uh,
and I asked Cheryl strayed this question can we wrote wild,
which was made into a movie and amazing woman and she said,
every sandwich I get has to be in uniform layers.
So every bite is a similar to the next as possible.
So if she gets a sandwich in,
like all the Avocados are kind of over on one side or whatever,
she'll reopen it and rearrange it so that everybody is the same.
Now,
I'm not saying you have to have something like that,
but does anything come to mind and unusual habit,
a weird object and absurd thing.
Anything that you love that is a little odd.
Random things.
Like I,
I always put my left shoe on before my right and not be not just a tennis shoe
but like any shoe because I never,
when I'm at a store and I'm trying shoes and they hand me a right shoe,
I'm like,
uh Oh,
sorry.
Like I'm fine with like opening the box again myself
to give you a strange luck.
Um,
then like for my out my match court outfits I don't like to wear,
usually people like to wear the same outfit,
so if they like did well in it,
they wear it again.
Um,
I mean they wash it but then where it again or maybe they don't wash it,
I don't know.
So I do the opposite.
I,
I don't wear it again.
I alternate.
So you never,
you know,
does that mean you want to wear the same exact one?
I'll wear the same looking outfit,
but I have a few different ones.
Okay.
But never the exact same outfit again.
I love it.
Not In that same tournament
when you win a huge higher,
um,
I,
you know,
I feel like I'm making a liar of myself,
but when you win a big tournament,
do you have a favorite cheat food or anything that you sell it?
Great.
I love sweets.
I love,
um,
I love Dolce de Leche.
I love 'em.
We have this cake in Russia.
Um,
it's called the [inaudible].
It's a honey cake.
Um,
I could eat that every day for breakfast,
lunch,
dinner,
or is it different?
No,
it's a little,
it's not as crunchy.
It's a soft cake.
I see.
It's a layer cake,
but it's a soft cake.
And Yeah.
I,
I love Cherry Blake.
When my grandmother makes cherry jam,
I could eat that by the spoons.
And that's like a child and memory.
Yeah.
So I love,
I love sweets.
Oh,
it makes sense for sugar pover for an athlete.
Right.
Thanks a lot of sentence and a,
well,
it's great for glycogen replenishment,
right?
Yes.
For those people wondering bullshit to let Shea also known as the crack cocaine
of Argentina.
Uh,
delicious on vanilla ice cream.
And,
uh,
if,
if it's going to keep other people up until four in the morning cause it'll
drive them nuts.
Rds,
Romanian,
right.
It's that it doesn't bother anybody.
Uh,
Marie,
this has been so much fun.
I really appreciate you taking the time and thank you.
So I really encourage people to learn more about your story.
I cannot wait.
Do you read unstoppable and people can find you at [inaudible] dot com Facebook.
It's facebook.com/sharapova and then Twitter and Instagram are both at Maria
Sharapova.
Uh,
do you have any final ask of the people listening or a suggestion for the
audience?
Anything that comes to mind?
Uh,
no.
I just,
I hope that they continue listening to your work cause I,
but when I started,
I was so impressed by your interviews and the way you're able to,
um,
get a lot out of people and in a conversational form.
And,
um,
so keep listening and,
uh,
yeah,
and I'm,
I'm so,
I'm really excited about the opportunity that I had to share my story with other
people and to share my journey.
And,
um,
you know,
sometimes we think that our story is not special and everyone's story is very
special and I've just been so excited about being able to put it on paper and
for everyone,
um,
you know,
to read,
to read it.
So yeah,
it's a big,
it's,
you know,
I've always been a very personal and private individuals,
so it's sort of a big moment for me because I share a lot of frame of mind that
I had as a young girl and as an athlete,
as a person,
as a daughter,
um,
in relationships.
So there's a lot I share that I never thought a few years ago I would be able
to.
Um,
it's exciting.
It's a little scary,
puts you in a vulnerable place,
but I'm very looking forward to,
to hearing what people think of it as well.
And a congratulations be,
we talked about toughness is one of your defining competitive advantages.
The fact that you recorded your own audio book.
Oh my God.
No,
I was like,
oh,
it's giving me enough credit for this.
So my God,
like you think walking through or running a marathon in the desert with no water
is hard.
Like recording an entire audio book.
I had to take a couple of days off after that because I was training in the
mornings and then I'd go and I'd record six to eight hours for three days.
Good.
God and I,
I called my team at the end of the third and I said I,
I,
first of all,
I have no voice and second of all like you have off tomorrow
cause they're not coming.
Yeah,
it is.
It is one of the most comprehensively exhausting experiences you can imagine,
which is why I've never recorded one of my own audio books.
I've all,
I've done bits and pieces and then I've tapped out.
Right.
So I,
well,
what I liked at the end of it was that after I read it and when you read out
loud it was,
I didn't want to change a single thing.
Yeah.
And that was when I,
that is incredible milestone.
Credibly rare,
incredibly,
incredibly rare.
Which means that the book has to be really,
really good.
I just,
that isn't a really clear and no,
no,
I'm telling you that's a really,
really clear indicator.
If you didn't change a,
it means that it's B.
It means that our dear friend Mr well,
I'm kidding.
I don't know,
but a rich Cohen I know of his work really got the voice right,
which is really,
really hard to do so I'm excited to check it out.
Everybody check it out and unstoppable.
You can find it everywhere and thank you so much for the time,
Maria.
I know that your time is precious and I know you have a lot of demands on your
time so I really appreciate it.
Thank you.
I appreciate it.
And to everybody listening,
you can find the show notes as usual links to everything we talked about,
links to the architects,
she named links to unstoppable self links to everything in the show
notes@tim.blog forward slash,
podcast and as always,
thank you for allowing me to make this my job,
I guess.
And until next time,
thanks for listening.
Hey guys,
this is Tim again.
Just a few more things before you take off.
Number one,
this is five bullet Friday.
Do you want to get a short email from me?
Would you enjoy getting a short email from me every Friday?
That provides a little more soul of fun before the weekend and five bullet
Fridays,
a very short email where I share the coolest things I've found or that I've been
pondering over the week.
That could include favorite new albums that I've discovered.
It could include Gizmos and gadgets and all sorts of weird shit that I've
somehow dug up in the,
uh,
the world of the esoteric as I do.
It could include favorite articles that I've read and that I've shared with my
close friends for instance.
And it's very short.
It's just a little tiny bite of goodness before you head off for the weekend.
So if you want to receive that,
check it out.
Just go to four hour work week.com that's four hour work week.com all spelled
out and just drop in your email and you'll get the very next one.
And if you sign up,
I hope you enjoyed this episode is brought to you by a cent protein,
the cleanest least process protein I've ever consumed and I have tried just
about everything since well before the four hour body.
I've started my day with 20 to 30 grams of protein.
First thing that has been part of my routine,
but I don't always have the time or necessarily the desire to cook an entire
meal,
so what to do.
Protein powders can be a fast way to get this protein needs met,
but most products are full of crap.
They're bleached,
they have excess sugar,
terrible artificial sweeteners or just straight forward low grade,
low quality protein ascent contains a zero artificial ingredients and the parent
company is actually cheese manufacturer,
so they produce their own native proteins.
It's,
it's really fascinating and I've looked at they're processing it takes or it
took them about five years to develop.
You can mix the protein in as little as four ounces without any clumps or issues
of mixed ability whatsoever and they nailed taste.
They tested,
for instance,
for the chocolate version 282 different versions.
They put a lot of money in,
a lot of time into RMD for this particular product,
nab both way and my seller casing.
So if you want to say improve body composition and recovery overnight slow
release,
you can take from my seller casein or in my case whey protein,
I would take postworkout for instance,
or in the morning.
So check it out.
These guys were really fascinating.
Visit a sense,
protein.com/tim that's a s,
c e n t p r o,
t,
e,
I n.com a sense like first ascent going up,
a sent protein.com forward slash Tim and you will receive 20% off your entire
purchase.
If you want a very quick 20th 30 gram dose to start your day or after workout.
This is a fantastic option.
It is arguably the best that I've found.
So again,
chicken up a scent,
protein.com forward slash Tim,
this episode is brought to you by kettle and fire,
which makes some of the best bone broth and certainly the most convenient that
I've ever found and I have a big stack of them on my kitchen counter right now I
have one container every morning and this first came highly recommended to me by
path podcast guests such as Amelia Boone who is a four time world champion in
both stops,
mudder,
Spartan race,
etc. And Dr Dominic D'agostino,
the incredible hulk of scientific research is check him out too.
But there are few things that make kettle and fire special.
Number one,
they are the first shelf stable.
In other words,
never frozen bone broth that uses bones from 100% grass fed,
organically raised animals,
so you are what you eat,
ate,
if that makes sense.
So it's very important that you understand if you're consuming animal protein,
what they consume.
They also use longer cook types of 20 plus hours,
which means more collagen and other nutrients.
For instance,
they contain 19 times more collagen then one of their close competitors.
And an independent lab confirm this,
I'll leave the competitor's name out of it because I don't want to get sued.
But that's the case and it is not frozen.
So thanks to many millions of dollars of packaging equipment.
Their bone broth doesn't require freezing or shipping with dry ice.
So like I said,
it's just sitting on my kitchen counter in boxes and then I can keep them up.
They're basically ready to drink,
keep them up on stove top or in a microwave and your ready to rock and roll.
You also get a nice payload of Glucosomine glycine,
uh,
along with the Gel to and everything else that I mentioned.
So check it out.
I've been hugely pleased with this and like I said,
had been consuming it every morning.
It gives you about let's say 20 grams of protein,
which is a nice little slow carb diet boost,
if that's what you're looking for it.
Then I'll typically sip this out of a very large camping coffee mug as I do some
writing or journaling so that you have it.
Check it out.
It's been,
I favor the chicken,
but uh,
each to his own or her own.
So check it out.
Kettle and fire.com/tim and you can receive 20% off of your entire order.
Take a look,
Kevin,
fire.com forward slash tip.